Glioma accounts for about 30% of primary central nervous system (CNS) tumors, but it comprises diverse morbidity and mortality rates across malignant CNS tumors. Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) has been studied extensively and epigenetic changes have been used to target novel therapeutics. In the study published by Muscat et. al 2018, the authors have used methylation profiles across recurrent and primary tumors to profile molecular changes in 409 oncogenes and presented evidence of cancer evolutionary changes that occur due to therapeutic response in patients. 21 patient samples were analyzed for both primary and recurrent tumors, and replicates existed in 4 patients for both clinical stages (primary and recurrent).
  
Our study applies a data science approach to analyse empirically derived values from methylation profiles of both primary and recurrent tumors from this study. The object was to elucidate patterns in methylation profiles across the stages of tumors and also identify differentially expressed methylation markers. Using Python 3.8 and RStudio, the raw profile data was preprocessed and inferential t-testing was implemented across the 416,349 present methylation regions. Under an alpha-level of 0.003 (0.3%), 47 genes were calculated to be statistically different between primary and recurrent stage samples. We then implemented principal component analysis (2 components), K-means clustering (4-6 clusters), volcano plotting, kernel density estimation plotting, agglomerative hierarchical clustering, and heatmaps, in order to visualize the expression values in different dimensions and frequency distributions. Certain tests were applied on both the complete normalized data and the statistically significant subset in order to observe trend consistency across the two. Most notably, one methylation region, cg24088408, exhibited skew behavior opposite to the others across several tests and patient samples. As such, we hypothesize that cg24088408 may be a genetic marker for primary stage glioblastoma. Future studies may use cg24088408 to rigorously correlate GBM incidence with vulnerable patient demographics, thus allowing GBM to be located and addressed more quickly across a wider population. 

